[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> The five-fold system is
the progression that is active
in form.
This is one of the major
progressions of numbers
that we live with.
Five is the number from
which our understanding
of the golden mean is generated.
This is a method of
proportioning the growth
of plants and animals.
It's the series
of numbers that is
dominant in the
expression of form.
We have another
progression of eight
that is dominant in the
expression of vibration.
Successions of five and eight
are two different lengths
that are both associated
with the two different levels
of the creative process of
Nada Brahma, the world emerging
from sound.
To make that just a
little bit clearer,
whenever you hear
a musical note,
you are actually
hearing the interaction
of two numbers as a ratio.
If you have a fundamental
note, this ratio is 1 over 1.
The second note moving up
the major diatonic scale
is 9 over 8.
That's what sound is.
It's a relationship
between numbers.
And all these numbers are
reducible to our first number,
the principle of the
duality and the emergence
of the first form,
which is a triangle.
The number 10 is just another
phase of the unity as a number.
And its inverse
always equals 1 or 10.
This is the unmanifest
phase of powers and energies
which were a preexistent
configuration
to the manifestation
of the world.
The manifestation of the
world begins, then, with 10.
Then what we get is
a series of ratios
that are particularly active
together as vibrations
that produce sound.
The first nine whole
numbers and their inverse
are all the powerful
harmonics of sound.
These are the powers
of sound creating form.
When you hear music, you hear
it and are responding to it
because these
sounds are actually
creating forms within
the cellular composition
of your body.
You're listening to
the birth of form.
That's the power that music has.
You're at the center
of the act of creation.
Those sounds are
created by a state
or being in relationship to
its own opposite-- oppositional
progressions.
The one non-harmonic
ratio in this series
is the relationship of 7 to 3.
While all these other ratios
are creative relationships,
this one is the
relationship of destruction.
This is the way the creator
transforms his creation
through a process of
cyclic destruction.
You cannot be born and
reborn without going through
a disintegration of
the previous form.
It's the cyclic
necessity of the creation
to have a time that both
creates and destroys.
Now as we have seen in our
little number exercise,
a ratio is the comparison
of two numbers.
When this comparison happens
in a controlled release
of vibration, you get sound.
And that sound
principle is the origin
of an evolution of substance
throughout the environment.
This structure of
the seed is an analog
of the basic tetractys,
which is also
the analog of the four ages and
10 yugas that carries forward
the genesis of humanity.
The containing ratio of
all sound, and therefore
all substance, is the ratio
of 1 to 2, the octave.
This ratio is detectable
in every culture.
Every human that
has ever heard sound
recognizes this as a
return to a new beginning.
That is what
generates a new scale.
The scale starts
over in the octave.
That's why a musical scale is
contained within an octave.
Let's say that 1
equals 6 vibrations,
and 2 would equal 12 vibrations.
And then there are two notes
that are in between 6 and 12.
The two major
chords that make up
all of the entire process of
harmony and harmonization,
whether it be in music
or in vibrations, that
are in an atomic level
or on a molecular level
would be sounding in harmony.
The 1 over here is equal to
3/4 and 2/3 of the 6 to 12.
And that would be 8 to 9.
You can describe the principal
tones of the musical scale,
which has four numbers--
6, 8, 9, and 12--
starting with the fundamental,
then the fourth, the fifth,
and then the octave.
This principle of inversion is
what we represent with ratios.
A ratio of space, 9 to 8, will
sound and the inverse of 8 to 9
and vice versa.
The fundamental is 1
over 1, which is 6 hertz.
The fourth is 4 over
3, which is 8 hertz.
The fifth is 3 over
2, which is 9 hertz.
And the octave is
2 over 1, 12 hertz.
In music, there is
this interconnection
between the divisions of
space and divisions of time.
Overlapping between
space and time
is what we'll be
investigating and discovering
throughout everything, our
exploration of the yuga system,
and also the measures
of the Earth.
As a single example of perhaps
hundreds of different harmonic
ratios that are expressed
and actually form
the cohesion on a
level of consciousness,
there is a ratio between the
orbit of the planet Mercury
and the orbit of the Earth,
which is the ratio 4 to 1--
four orbits exactly to the
one orbit of the Earth.
This is from a book,
"Cycles of Heaven,"
that was compiled in relation
to astronomers that provided
the data on which they were able
to discover ancient knowledge
inherent in the solar system.
Continuing again, the
orbit of the planet Mercury
to the orbit of Venus
is the ratio of 5 to 2.
The orbit of Uranus to Mars is
exactly the ratio of 3 to 1.
The orbit of Mars to
Jupiter is 6 to 1.
The orbit of Jupiter to
Saturn is again 5 to 2.
The orbit of Uranus and
Neptune is exactly an octave--
2 to 1.
The orbit of Neptune
to Pluto is exactly
in musical fit of 3 to 2.
In ancient times,
Saturn was often
referred to as the "outer sun."
In other words,
planets were believed
to actually be held between the
forces of the sun and Saturn.
There's a very interesting
relationship between the planet
Saturn and our moon.
The moon has a rotation
cycle of 29.5 days, which
is a transposition of the exact
number of years of the Saturn
cycle, 29.5 years.
These are the forces that
hold the universe together.
And these are also
the forces that
are represented in the Trinity
of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva,
where Brahma is Rajas, the
forces of spin, motion,
and movement, the creative
father of the entire system.
Vishnu is [NON-ENGLISH],,
which means intelligence.
It is the cohesive force
that maintains the continuity
of the whole system.
And Shiva is the force
of transformation
and disintegration.
Hindus say of Shiva that he
is the most powerful lord
because there is nothing in
the universe that does not
arise from disintegration.
As the lord of disintegration,
he maintains that
through his form as Mahakala.
Scientists who postulate
that everything resulted
from one big bang are
ignorant of the true nature
of the system in which we live.
The ancients, particularly
in Egypt and India,
had a way of
thinking that allowed
them to discover that this
entire system is musical.
It is the harmonies of
sound, echoing eternally
through the infinite ether.
And all of that is simply
an imagination and idea
that occurred in the
mind of the creator.
This is something that
is found throughout all
the Puranic texts.
One of the well-known methods
of geometric teachings
is the idea of
squaring the circle.
This means a student of
the Pythagorean teachings
was asked to find a
circle and square which
had the same measure
in their perimeters.
This is something that is found
to preexist within the measures
of the Earth and the moon.
We must remember that
the diameter of the Earth
is approximately 7,920 miles.
If we look at a square which
has a side equal to the diameter
of the Earth, each side
has a measure of 7,920,
for a total perimeter of 31,680.
If we take a circle with that
same circumference of 31,680,
it will have a radius
of 5,040, which
is the number of the Kali Yuga.
If you take the radius of
such a circle, which is 3,960,
and add it to the radius of
the moon, which is 1,080,
you also get the number of
the Kali Yuga, which is 5,040.
Let's look at the circle
with the perimeter of 31,680.
If you inscribe within this
circle a 10-sided figure,
you form a cord of
that circle to 1 to 10,
which gives us an arc
measurement of 3,168.
Remember, we're talking about
10 yugas to a Maha-Kalpa.
In the previous
episode, we revealed
that the full length of the
Kali Yuga is 6,048 years.
Half of that yuga gives
us the number of 3,024.
If we put the arc measurement
of our circle, 3,168,
over this half-yuga
number, we find
that they have the same
relationship as 3 over pi.
This ratio, 3 over pi, is
found in the human body
and also in classical
proportions.
It is the ratio of the height
of man to his arm span,
which is the same
ratio as the 10 yugas
in the circle of the Earth.
This is a time period
which is resonant
with the movement and size
of our Earth and our bodies--
the body of the Earth
and the body of man.
How much of this was known
to the people who first
came upon the yuga system?
No one truly knows.
But where we are looking
from our perspective in time,
this kind of information
is becoming available.
The other interesting
thing is that when
you put the moon on
top of the Earth,
you can build a right
triangle from their measures.
One side is the radius of the
moon, which is 1,080 miles.
Another side is the
radius of the Earth,
which is 3,960 miles.
This gives us the
hypotenuse of 4,104.
The measures of each
side of this triangle
are all multiples of 72.
And 2 times 72 is equal to 144.
Let's take a look at the
embedded harmony of 144.
144 is, of course, 12 squared.
12 is the number that
not only dominates
the spacial relationship
of the Earth and moon.
But it also controls time,
with 12 hours on a clock
and 12 months in a year.
The vision of the cycles of the
Earth are spatially imprinted.
Thus, we are
continually confronting
harmonic relationships
that cross over
or transpose between
time and space.
If these are the underlying
organizing principles of space,
do they and are they
also found in time?
We shall see that they do.
The procession of the equinox
is a retrograde motion
through each of
the zodiac signs.
The procession moves one
degree every 72 years.
At the beginning
of spring, the sun
rises with a certain backdrop
of stars in the zodiac.
It will move backwards
one degree every 72 years
and emerge after 360
degrees, or 25,920 years,
back at the same place.
This precession of the
equinox is recorded and noted
in Stonehenge, in the
monuments in Peru.
And it is one of the sight lines
found at the Great Pyramid.
All of these
megaliths keep track
of this rate of precession.
Plato called it
the "Great Year."
In other words, it
is analogous to what
we experience every year
with the Earth passing
around the sun.
The sequence of numbers that
we have looked at previously--
216, 432, 864, and so on--
are all multiples of 72 and
are inherent in this number
of years for time.
It's very interesting that you
find in the yuga numbers that
are all composed of the
same forces or principles
that these numbers represent.
The number 2,160 is the diameter
of the moon measured in miles.
And it is also the
duration of time
it takes to precess through
one sign of the zodiac, 2,160
years.
Simply inverse the
zero from the end
and write it as 2,016 to find
a number in the yuga system.
2,016 is one third of the full
duration of the Kali-Yuga.
What we see is that
2,016 is a multiple of 7.
And 2,160 is a multiple of 3.
This gives us the
relationship of 7 to 3,
which we discussed as the
relationship of destruction.
We are looking at
an inherent ratio
that occurs in the simple
inversion of the sequence of 1
to 10.
10 is the number of
our fingers and toes.
And that principle is reiterated
in every one of the dimensions.
When you find 4,320
in the precession,
you'll find 4,032 in the yuga.
If you work it out into the
basic ratio that's being
expressed here, it's 14 to 15.
4,320 over 15 equals 288.
4,032 over 14 equals 288,
the yuga to the precessional.
You can do that with
all of the numbers.
We can see that these numbers
express the relationship not
only between space
and time, but also
the idea that music
and vibration are
the language of the universe.
That's why this is
the yuga principle.